[docs] CDC outline and hierarchy (#17030)
yugabyte/yugabyte-db: docs/content/preview/explore/change-data-capture/cdc-tutorials/cdc-azure-event-hub.md

![Solution architecture to move YugabyteDB CDC data to Azure Synapse](/images/explore/cdc/eventhub_images/azeh_adls_end_2_end_architecture.jpg)

The following table describes the components.

| Component | Description |
| :--- | :--- |
| YugabyteDB Anywhere | Yugabyte self-managed DBaaS for deploying YugabyteDB at scale that includes YugabyteDB's self-managed, stateless CDC functionality with support for Confluent Kafka Connect. A pull-based model is used to report changes from the database Write-Ahead-Log (WAL). For more information on CDC, refer to [Change Data Capture](../../../change-data-capture/). |
| [Debezium connector](../../debezium-connector-yugabytedb/) | Pulls data from YugabyteDB, publishes it to Kafka, and runs in a Microsoft Azure Virtual Machine. |
| [Azure Event Hubs](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/event-hubs/event-hubs-about) | Azure big data streaming platform and event ingestion service.
| [Azure Synapse Pipelines](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/data-factory/concepts-pipelines-activities?) |context=%2Fazure%2Fsynapse-analytics%2Fcontext%2Fcontext&tabs=synapse-analytics |

> | [ADLS Gen2](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/storage/blobs/data-lake-storage-introduction) Storage account | |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| [ADLS Gen2](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/storage/blobs/data-lake-storage-introduction) | Storage account |
```

| [Azure Synapse workspace](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/synapse-analytics/overview-what-is) | Azure integrated platform service that merges the capabilities of data lakes, data integrations for ETL/ELT pipelines, analytics tools, and services. |

The following table describes how the data flows through each of these components.

| Step | Component | Operation |
| --- | --- | --- |

> | 1 | Debezium YugabyteDB Kafka Connect | Stream the changed data sets requested from the source YugabyteDB Anywhere YSQL Tables |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| 1 | Debezium YugabyteDB Kafka Connect | Stream the changed data sets requested from the source YugabyteDB Anywhere YSQL Tables. |
```

> | 2 | Azure Event Hubs |Stream messages from Kafka to different targets

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| 2 | Azure Event Hubs |Stream messages from Kafka to different targets.
```

> | 3 | Azure Synapse Analytics Pipeline|Used to schedule data-driven workflows that can ingest data from Azure Event Hubs to an Azure Data Lake Storage (ADLS) Gen 2 account |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| 3 | Azure Synapse Analytics Pipeline|Used to schedule data-driven workflows that can ingest data from Azure Event Hubs to an Azure Data Lake Storage (ADLS) Gen 2 account. |
```

> | 4 | ADLS (Azure Data Lake Services) Gen2 | CDC data from the Azure Event Hub is saved to ADLS Gen2 in Parquet format |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| 4 | ADLS (Azure Data Lake Services) Gen2 | CDC data from the Azure Event Hub is saved to ADLS Gen2 in Parquet format. |
```

> | 5 | Azure Synapse workspace | Azure SQL Pools and Spark Pools can be used to analyze the CDC data from Yugabyte in near real time |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| 5 | Azure Synapse workspace | Azure SQL Pools and Spark Pools can be used to analyze the CDC data from Yugabyte in near real time. |
```

## Prerequisites

To get started, you'll need the following:

- YugabyteDB Anywhere database with CDC enabled.
- An Azure Event Hubs instance.
- An Azure Synapse Analytics workspace with SQL Pools and Spark Pools. Tables can be created in the SQL Pools to house the CDC data.

> - An Azure Data Lake Storage Gen2 account. The Yugabyte CDC data resides in this Storage account and can be queried using external tables in Synapse SQL Pools.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- An Azure Data Lake Storage Gen2 account. The YugabyteDB CDC data resides in this Storage account and can be queried using external tables in Synapse SQL Pools.
```

## Get Started

Use the following steps to move YugabyteDB CDC data into Azure Synapse Analytics using the YugabyteDB Debezium Connector that streams data into Azure Event Hubs. This data can be stored as Avro/JSON/Parquet in Azure Data Lake Storage Gen2 and then accessed via SQL Pools or Spark Pools in the Synapse workspace.

### Step 1: Create an Event Hubs namespace and Event Hubs

Azure Event Hubs will be used to capture the CDC data from YugabyteDB. To create Event Hubs namespace and Event Hubs, refer to the [Quickstart instructions](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/event-hubs/event-hubs-create) in the Microsoft documentation. Save the Event Hubs connection string and fully qualified domain name (FQDN) for later use. For instructions, see [Get an Event Hubs connection string](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/event-hubs/event-hubs-get-connection-string).

### Step 2: Create a YugabyteDB CDC Connector

> Now that you have created Event Hubs in Azure, you need to create a YugabyteDB CDC Connector that will capture the changes in the Yugabyte database and send them to Event Hubs. Follow these steps to create a YugabyteDB CDC Connector:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that you have created Event Hubs in Azure, you need to create a YugabyteDB CDC Connector that will capture the changes in the Yugabyte database and send them to Event Hubs. Perform the following steps to create a YugabyteDB CDC Connector:
```

> 1. Add data and tables to YugabyteDB. Once this is done, [create the CDC Stream ID using the yb-admin command](../../../../integrations/cdc/debezium/#create-a-database-stream-id).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Add data and tables to YugabyteDB. After this is done, [create the CDC Stream ID using the yb-admin command](../../../../integrations/cdc/debezium/#create-a-database-stream-id).
```

1. [Download Apache Kafka](https://downloads.apache.org/kafka/3.3.2/kafka_2.12-3.3.2.tgz).

> 1. Configure your event hub to connect and receive data from the Debezium Connector for Yugabyte. You can create an Azure Event Hub configuration file that will be saved locally on the machine, for example you can save the configuration file as `eventhub.config` in the Kafka `bin` directory. The sample available in the [Kafka Connect for Event Hubs](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/event-hubs/event-hubs-kafka-connect-tutorial#configure-kafka-connect-for-event-hubs) documentation will help with this configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Configure your event hub to connect and receive data from the Debezium Connector for Yugabyte. You can create an Azure Event Hub configuration file that will be saved locally on the machine, for example you can save the configuration file as `eventhub.config` in the Kafka `bin` directory. For more details on creating your configuration file, refer to the sample available in the [Kafka Connect for Event Hubs](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/event-hubs/event-hubs-kafka-connect-tutorial#configure-kafka-connect-for-event-hubs) documentation.
```

1. Navigate to the Kafka bin directory (for example, /home/azureuser/kafka_2.12-3.2.0/bin) on your machine and run the following command:

    ```sh
    ./connect-distributed.sh <Event Hub configuration file>
    ```

    This command starts YugabyteDB Debezium Kafka Connect.

1. Create a Kafka Connector by running the following commands:

    ```sh
    curl -i -X POST -H "Accept:application/json" -H "Content-Type:application/json" \

    localhost:8083/connectors/ \

    -d '{
    "name": "ybconnector",
    "config": {
        "connector.class": "io.debezium.connector.yugabytedb.YugabyteDBConnector",
        "database.hostname":"'$IP'",
        "database.port":"5433",
        "database.master.addresses": "'$IP':7100",
        "database.user": "yugabyte",
        "database.password": "yugabyte",
        "database.dbname" : "yugabyte",
        "database.server.name": "<db server name>",
        "table.include.list":"public.your table name",
        "database.streamid":your generated stream id",
        "snapshot.mode":"never"
      }
    }'
    ```

>     Replace the StreamID and database details as needed. Don't forget to also replace the $IP variable with your YugabyteDB address or DNS Name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Replace the StreamID and database details as needed. Additionally, replace the $IP variable with your YugabyteDB address or DNS Name.
```

### Step 3: Configure the YugabyteDB CDC Connector

After you have created the YugabyteDB CDC Connector, you must configure it to send CDC data to Azure Event Hubs.

To connect the CDC Connector to Event Hubs, edit the `config.yaml` file in the directory where you created the YugabyteDB CDC Connector, with the following parameters:

> - `dest_conf`: Connection string for the event hub. You can find this connection string in the Azure portal by navigating to Event Hubs and clicking on "Shared access policies". Then click on "RootManageSharedAccessKey" and copy the "Connection string - primary key".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `dest_conf`: Connection string for the event hub. You can find this connection string in the Azure portal by navigating to **Event Hubs > Shared access policies**, click **RootManageSharedAccessKey** and copy the "Connection string - primary key".
```

- `batch_size`: Maximum number of events that can be sent in a single batch.
- `batch_timeout_ms`: Maximum time (in milliseconds) that can elapse before a batch is sent, even if it is not full.
- `consumer_threads`: Number of threads that the CDC Connector will use to consume events from YugabyteDB. Set this value based on the number of cores on your machine.
- `poll_interval_ms`: Interval (in milliseconds) at which the CDC Connector will check for new events in the Yugabyte database.

### Step 4: Run the YugabyteDB CDC Connector

> Start the YugabyteDB CDC Connector by running the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Start the YugabyteDB CDC Connector using the following command:
```

```sh
sql $ yb-connect-cdc start --cdc_dir <directory>
```

Replace <directory> with the directory you used when creating the YugabyteDB CDC Connector. The CDC Connector will start capturing changes from the YugabyteDB database and sending them to Azure Event Hubs.

### Step 5: Pull Events From Azure EventHubs

> You have several options to move data from Azure Event Hubs to a Synapse workspace. An option using Azure Synapse Pipelines in a Spark Notebook is described below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You have several options to move data from Azure Event Hubs to a Synapse workspace. An option using Azure Synapse Pipelines in a Spark Notebook is described in the following section.
```

#### Use Azure Synapse Pipelines with Event Hubs

An Azure Synapse pipeline, which subscribes to changes in Event Hubs via a custom trigger, can be used to move CDC data into an ADLS Gen 2 account. One option to accomplish this is to create a Spark Notebook from Azure Synapse Studio which connects to Event Hubs for the specific topic(s) and stores the data in an ADLS Gen2 folder.

> Sample code for a PySpark Notebook for an IoT management application, which pulls data from each of the event hubs every five minutes for analysis, is shared below. This Python code will pull the messages from the event hub and persists them in ADLS Gen2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Following is a sample code for a PySpark Notebook for an IoT management application, which pulls data from each of the event hubs every five minutes for analysis. This Python code will pull the messages from the event hub and persist them in ADLS Gen2.
```

  "enqueuedTime": None, #not in use
  "isInclusive": True
}

conf = {}
conf["eventhubs.connectionString"] = sc._jvm.org.apache.spark.eventhubs.EventHubsUtils.encrypt(connectionString)
conf["eventhubs.consumerGroup"] = "$Default"
conf["eventhubs.startingPosition"] = json.dumps(startingEventPosition)
df = spark \
  .readStream \
  .format("eventhubs") \
  .options(**conf) \
  .load()
df = df.withColumn("body", df["body"].cast("string")
df1= df.select(get_json_object(df['body'],"$.payload.before.eventid.value").alias('beforeeventid'), get_json_object(df['body'],"$.payload.after.eventid.value").alias('eventid'),get_json_object(df['body'],"$.payload.after.sensor_uuid.value").alias('sensor_uuid'),get_json_object(df['body'],"$.payload.after.humidity.value").alias('humidity'),get_json_object(df['body'],"$.payload.op").alias('Operation'))
df2=df1.select(eventid','sensor_uuid','humidity','operation', when(df1.Operation =='d',df1.beforeeventid).otherwise(df1.eventid).alias('eventid'))
#Save the data in Delta Format
query = (df2.writeStream.format('delta') \
  .option('checkpointLocation',checkpointpath) \
  .option("path", write_path) \
  .outputMode("append") \
  .start()
)
```

> Save and execute this code snippet in the Azure Synapse Analytics Workspace using a Spark Pool with Pyspark as the language after making changes as appropriate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Save and execute this code snippet in the Azure Synapse Analytics Workspace using a Spark Pool with Pyspark as the language after making any appropriate changes.
```

You can analyze the data in the ADLS Gen2 account using Spark pools as described in [Query captured data in Parquet format with Azure Synapse Analytics Spark Pools](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/stream-analytics/event-hubs-parquet-capture-tutorial#query-using-azure-synapse-spark).

### Step 6: View CDC Data in Azure Synapse Dedicated SQL Pools or Spark Pools

You can choose to view the CDC data stored in the ADLS Gen 2 account using either Synapse SQL Dedicated or Serverless Pools.

To do this, follow the instructions in the Microsoft documentation:

- [Synapse SQL documentation for external tables](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/synapse-analytics/sql/develop-tables-external-tables?tabs=hadoop#external-tables-in-dedicated-sql-pool-and-serverless-sql-pool); or
- [Query captured data in Parquet format with Azure Synapse Analytics Serverless SQL](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/stream-analytics/event-hubs-parquet-capture-tutorial#query-using-azure-synapse-serverless-sql)

> And that's it! With these six steps, you can connect the YugabyteDB CDC Connector to Azure Event Hubs and ingest data into Azure Synapse Analytics for analysis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
